ELEUTHERIA
by Oscar Wilde

SONNET TO LIBERTY


   NOT that I love thy children, whose dull eyes
   See nothing save their own unlovely woe,
   Whose minds know nothing, nothing care to know,—
   But that the roar of thy Democracies,
   Thy reigns of Terror, thy great Anarchies,
   Mirror my wildest passions like the sea
   And give my rage a brother—!  Liberty!
   For this sake only do thy dissonant cries
   Delight my discreet soul, else might all kings
   By bloody knout or treacherous cannonades
   Rob nations of their rights inviolate
   And I remain unmoved—and yet, and yet,
   These Christs that die upon the barricades,
   God knows it I am with them, in some things.

Summary
The speaker declares affection for Liberty not for the sake of her children but because her chaotic manifestations reflect their own passions. The poem explores the speaker's complex relationship with Liberty, finding a connection in the tumultuous nature of democracies and anarchies.


AVE IMPERATRIX


   SET in this stormy Northern sea,
      Queen of these restless fields of tide,
   England! what shall men say of thee,
      Before whose feet the worlds divide?

   The earth, a brittle globe of glass,
      Lies in the hollow of thy hand,
   And through its heart of crystal pass,
      Like shadows through a twilight land,

   The spears of crimson-suited war,
      The long white-crested waves of fight,
   And all the deadly fires which are
      The torches of the lords of Night.

   The yellow leopards, strained and lean,
      The treacherous Russian knows so well,
   With gaping blackened jaws are seen
      Leap through the hail of screaming shell.

   The strong sea-lion of England’s wars
      Hath left his sapphire cave of sea,
   To battle with the storm that mars
      The stars of England’s chivalry.

   The brazen-throated clarion blows
      Across the Pathan’s reedy fen,
   And the high steeps of Indian snows
      Shake to the tread of armèd men.

   And many an Afghan chief, who lies
      Beneath his cool pomegranate-trees,
   Clutches his sword in fierce surmise
      When on the mountain-side he sees

   The fleet-foot Marri scout, who comes
      To tell how he hath heard afar
   The measured roll of English drums
      Beat at the gates of Kandahar.

   For southern wind and east wind meet
      Where, girt and crowned by sword and fire,
   England with bare and bloody feet
      Climbs the steep road of wide empire.

   O lonely Himalayan height,
      Grey pillar of the Indian sky,
   Where saw’st thou last in clanging flight
      Our wingèd dogs of Victory?

   The almond-groves of Samarcand,
      Bokhara, where red lilies blow,
   And Oxus, by whose yellow sand
      The grave white-turbaned merchants go:

   And on from thence to Ispahan,
      The gilded garden of the sun,
   Whence the long dusty caravan
      Brings cedar wood and vermilion;

   And that dread city of Cabool
      Set at the mountain’s scarpèd feet,
   Whose marble tanks are ever full
      With water for the noonday heat:

   Where through the narrow straight Bazaar
      A little maid Circassian
   Is led, a present from the Czar
      Unto some old and bearded khan,—

   Here have our wild war-eagles flown,
      And flapped wide wings in fiery fight;
   But the sad dove, that sits alone
      In England—she hath no delight.

   In vain the laughing girl will lean
      To greet her love with love-lit eyes:
   Down in some treacherous black ravine,
      Clutching his flag, the dead boy lies.

   And many a moon and sun will see
      The lingering wistful children wait
   To climb upon their father’s knee;
      And in each house made desolate

   Pale women who have lost their lord
      Will kiss the relics of the slain—
   Some tarnished epaulette—some sword—
      Poor toys to soothe such anguished pain.

   For not in quiet English fields
      Are these, our brothers, lain to rest,
   Where we might deck their broken shields
      With all the flowers the dead love best.

   For some are by the Delhi walls,
      And many in the Afghan land,
   And many where the Ganges falls
      Through seven mouths of shifting sand.

   And some in Russian waters lie,
      And others in the seas which are
   The portals to the East, or by
      The wind-swept heights of Trafalgar.

   O wandering graves!  O restless sleep!
      O silence of the sunless day!
   O still ravine!  O stormy deep!
      Give up your prey!  Give up your prey!

   And thou whose wounds are never healed,
      Whose weary race is never won,
   O Cromwell’s England! must thou yield
      For every inch of ground a son?

   Go! crown with thorns thy gold-crowned head,
      Change thy glad song to song of pain;
   Wind and wild wave have got thy dead,
      And will not yield them back again.

   Wave and wild wind and foreign shore
      Possess the flower of English land—
   Lips that thy lips shall kiss no more,
      Hands that shall never clasp thy hand.

   What profit now that we have bound
      The whole round world with nets of gold,
   If hidden in our heart is found
      The care that groweth never old?

   What profit that our galleys ride,
      Pine-forest-like, on every main?
   Ruin and wreck are at our side,
      Grim warders of the House of Pain.

   Where are the brave, the strong, the fleet?
      Where is our English chivalry?
   Wild grasses are their burial-sheet,
      And sobbing waves their threnody.

   O loved ones lying far away,
      What word of love can dead lips send!
   O wasted dust!  O senseless clay!
      Is this the end! is this the end!

   Peace, peace! we wrong the noble dead
      To vex their solemn slumber so;
   Though childless, and with thorn-crowned head,
      Up the steep road must England go,

   Yet when this fiery web is spun,
      Her watchmen shall descry from far
   The young Republic like a sun
      Rise from these crimson seas of war.

Summary:
The poem praises England, portraying it as a powerful force in the world. It vividly describes scenes of war and conquest, acknowledging the sacrifices made by soldiers. The speaker laments the losses, expressing the futility of war and the sorrow it brings to families and nations.


TO MILTON


   MILTON!  I think thy spirit hath passed away
   From these white cliffs and high-embattled towers;
      This gorgeous fiery-coloured world of ours
   Seems fallen into ashes dull and grey,
   And the age changed unto a mimic play
      Wherein we waste our else too-crowded hours:
      For all our pomp and pageantry and powers
   We are but fit to delve the common clay,
   Seeing this little isle on which we stand,
      This England, this sea-lion of the sea,
      By ignorant demagogues is held in fee,
   Who love her not: Dear God! is this the land
      Which bare a triple empire in her hand
      When Cromwell spake the word Democracy!

Summary:
The poem addresses Milton, suggesting that his spirit has departed from England. It criticizes the state of the nation, claiming that it has fallen into a superficial and artificial existence. The speaker mourns the loss of the democratic ideals once championed by England during Cromwell's time.

LOUIS NAPOLEON


   EAGLE of Austerlitz! where were thy wings
      When far away upon a barbarous strand,
      In fight unequal, by an obscure hand,
   Fell the last scion of thy brood of Kings!

   Poor boy! thou shalt not flaunt thy cloak of red,
      Or ride in state through Paris in the van
      Of thy returning legions, but instead
   Thy mother France, free and republican,

   Shall on thy dead and crownless forehead place
      The better laurels of a soldier’s crown,
      That not dishonoured should thy soul go down
   To tell the mighty Sire of thy race

   That France hath kissed the mouth of Liberty,
      And found it sweeter than his honied bees,
      And that the giant wave Democracy
   Breaks on the shores where Kings lay couched at ease.

Summary:
The poem addresses Louis Napoleon, reflecting on his downfall. It sympathizes with the fallen ruler, predicting that he won't enjoy the glory he once sought. The poem contrasts the fate of Louis Napoleon with the triumph of republican France and its embrace of liberty.

SONNET


              ON THE MASSACRE OF THE CHRISTIANS IN BULGARIA

   CHRIST, dost Thou live indeed? or are Thy bones
   Still straitened in their rock-hewn sepulchre?
   And was Thy Rising only dreamed by her
   Whose love of Thee for all her sin atones?
   For here the air is horrid with men’s groans,
   The priests who call upon Thy name are slain,
   Dost Thou not hear the bitter wail of pain
   From those whose children lie upon the stones?
   Come down, O Son of God! incestuous gloom
   Curtains the land, and through the starless night
   Over Thy Cross a Crescent moon I see!
   If Thou in very truth didst burst the tomb
   Come down, O Son of Man! and show Thy might
   Lest Mahomet be crowned instead of Thee!

Summary:
The poem questions the existence of Christ in the face of atrocities, specifically the massacre of Christians in Bulgaria. The speaker implores Christ to intervene and wonders if the suffering and injustice will lead to the triumph of Islam over Christianity.


QUANTUM MUTATA


   THERE was a time in Europe long ago
      When no man died for freedom anywhere,
      But England’s lion leaping from its lair
   Laid hands on the oppressor! it was so
   While England could a great Republic show.
      Witness the men of Piedmont, chiefest care
      Of Cromwell, when with impotent despair
   The Pontiff in his painted portico
   Trembled before our stern ambassadors.
      How comes it then that from such high estate
      We have thus fallen, save that Luxury
   With barren merchandise piles up the gate
   Where noble thoughts and deeds should enter by:
      Else might we still be Milton’s heritors.

Summary:
The poem reflects on a time when England was known for its fight for freedom. It contrasts this with the contemporary state of the country, lamenting its fall from grace due to luxury and a focus on materialism. The poem suggests a departure from the noble legacy left by figures like Milton.


LIBERTATIS SACRA FAMES


   ALBEIT nurtured in democracy,
      And liking best that state republican
      Where every man is Kinglike and no man
   Is crowned above his fellows, yet I see,
   Spite of this modern fret for Liberty,
      Better the rule of One, whom all obey,
      Than to let clamorous demagogues betray
   Our freedom with the kiss of anarchy.
   Wherefore I love them not whose hands profane
      Plant the red flag upon the piled-up street
      For no right cause, beneath whose ignorant reign
   Arts, Culture, Reverence, Honour, all things fade,
      Save Treason and the dagger of her trade,
      Or Murder with his silent bloody feet.

Summary:
The poem expresses a preference for a monarchical rule where one ruler is obeyed over the chaos brought by demagogues in a democratic setting. The speaker criticizes the misuse of the red flag as a symbol of anarchy, condemning those who undermine freedom with their misguided actions.

THEORETIKOS


   THIS mighty empire hath but feet of clay:
      Of all its ancient chivalry and might
      Our little island is forsaken quite:
   Some enemy hath stolen its crown of bay,
   And from its hills that voice hath passed away
      Which spake of Freedom: O come out of it,
      Come out of it, my Soul, thou art not fit
   For this vile traffic-house, where day by day
      Wisdom and reverence are sold at mart,
      And the rude people rage with ignorant cries
   Against an heritage of centuries.
      It mars my calm: wherefore in dreams of Art
      And loftiest culture I would stand apart,
   Neither for God, nor for his enemies.

Summary:
The poem criticizes the British Empire, suggesting it has lost its former greatness. The speaker condemns the degradation of wisdom and culture, attributing it to a society driven by commerce and ignorant cries. The poem expresses a desire to distance oneself from a society tainted by avarice and lack of respect for heritage.
